# Gillespie

This is a package of code used to research information processing inside of cells. In
the `docs` directory there are some notes about the research background.

## What this is for

The idea is to calculate the *mutual information* between entire “trajectories” of
events. The mutual information between two random variables describes how much the
uncertainty about the value of one random variable is reduced when the other random
variable's value is known.

When we think about entire trajectories it is helpful to have the picture of one
variable being the signal and the other variable being the response of some system or
channel to that signal. Then we would like to know by how much we reduce the uncertainty
of what the signal is when we have access to the response. In other words: we describe
how much information about the signal is still present in the response.

Here we are interested in the information processing efficiency of biochemical networks.
To estimate the mutual information between chosen signals and the responses generated by
different reaction networks we employ a monte carlo sampling technique.

## Installation

You have to install the dependencies from `requirements.txt` first.

## Usage

Create `configuration.toml` to configure the individual actions. An example
configuration is provided in `configuration_default.toml`.

Then from the project directory just run

```sh
python3 mutual_information
```

from the shell to execute the calculation.

The application needs a configuration file named `configuration.toml` to be present in
the current working directory. The configuration file format used is
[TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml) which is designed to be both human-readable
and easy to process. You can find a sample configuration file in
`configuration_default.toml`.

### Advanced configuration

The configuration file can be used as a [Jinja2](https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/)
Template.
